---
layout: page
title: DST Quick Reference
permalink: /dst-quick-reference/
---

# Data Structures Quick Reference

Common data structures, use cases, standard operations and associated time complexities:

## Arrays

The fundamental [[contiguously-allocated]] data structure. These data records
are of fixed size. Consequently, each element can be located by its numeric
index. Arrays come in two flavors: **static** (fixed size), and **dynamic**.
Arrays offered first class by interpreted languages (e.g. JavaScript, Python)
are implemented dynamically.

**Use cases**: Fundamental structure used ubiquitously. Can be used to create
Stacks, Queues, and Graphs (Adjacency Lists).

**Advantages**:
- Constant time access to elements provided the index is known (efficient random
  access).
- Space efficient as it doesn't use pointers.
- Contiguous allocation allows for better memory locality and cache performance.

**Drawbacks**:
- Less efficient, complex insertion in comparison to Linked Lists.
- Overflow is possible when writing to or attempting to access static arrays.
- With large records, moving pointers instead of the items themselves is faster
  and easier.

| **Operation** | **Time Complexity** |
| -------- | -------- |
| **Access** | **O(1)** |
| **Update** | **O(1)** |
| **Insert (Beg.)** | **O(N)** |
| **Insert (Mid.)** | **O(N)** |
| **Insert (End)** | **Amortized O(1) dynamic; O(N) static** |
| **Remove (Beg.)** | **O(N)** |
| **Remove (Mid.)** | **O(N)** |
| **Remove (End)** | **O(1)** |
| **Search** | **O(N)** |
| **Copy** | **O(N)** |

## Linked Lists

The fundamental linked data structure. Unlike their [[contiguously-allocated]],
counterpart, [[dst-quick-reference#Arrays]], memory is allocated dynamically,
and their elements consequently have no index or order beyond head and tail
nodes. Elements are connected by pointers, which represent the address of a
location in memory. Linked Lists most commonly come in two flavors: **singly**
and **doubly** linked. Linked lists are a specialized data structure that may or
may not have first class support in a language.

**Use cases**: Fundamental structure used as an alternative to
 [[dst-quick-reference#Arrays]]. Can be used to create Stacks, Queues, and
 Graphs (Adjacency Lists).

 **Advantages**:
- Unlike static arrays, overflow can never occur.
- Simple insertion and deletion.
- Work well with large records as moving pointers is easier and faster than
  moving the record itself.

**Drawbacks**:
- Inefficient random access given lack of indices.
- Pointers require space consumption.

**Standard Operations:**

| **Operation** | **Time Complexity** |
| -------- | -------- |
| **Access (head/tail)** | **O(1)** |
| **Access / Search (non-head/tail)** | **O(N)** |
| **Insert / Remove (head/tail)** | **O(1)** |
| **Insert / Remove before/after non-head/tail node** | **O(N)** |

- **Note:** Singly linked lists have no tail pointer, so access to final element is **O(N)**.

#### References
---
- [Algorithm Design Manual 2nd](https://www.amazon.com/Algorithm-Design-Manual-Steven-Skiena/dp/1849967202)

[//begin]: # "Autogenerated link references for markdown compatibility"
[contiguously-allocated]: contiguously-allocated "Contiguous Structures"
[dst-quick-reference#Arrays]: dst-quick-reference "DST Quick Reference"
[//end]: # "Autogenerated link references"