---
layout: page
title: Payment Systems
permalink: /payment-systems/
---

# Payment Systems

## Description

A payment system can mean different things to different people. To some, it
could mean a [Digital
Wallet](https://www.investopedia.com/terms/d/digital-wallet.asp), like Venmo or
Apple Pay. Others may think of a backend system that executes payments like
Stripe or Paypal. Consequently, this classification is a loose descriptor
that only coveys the general nature of the problem; specific requirements are
necessary to get a clear picture of system responsibilities.

A common thread among payment systems is **money movement** – the need to
facilitate the transfer of funds between at least two parties.

## Components

### Payment Service

Operative component. Processes user initiated or recurring payment events.
Updates data stores and communicates with complementary services.

May perform risk / compliance checks in conjunction with external service
provider. Initiates payment execution through payment service provider (PSP).

### Payment Service Provider (PSP)

External service that moves money between accounts. Stripe and Square are
industry examples.

### Card Schemes

Process credit card operations. Visa, Discover, MasterCard, etc. are examples.

### Ledger

Keeps record of all payment transactions. Important for bookkeeping and post
payment analysis. Provides end-to-end traceability and ensures consistency
throughout payment cycle. Likely implements [Double-entry accounting](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Double-entry_bookkeeping).

### Wallet

Keeps merchant account balances. Useful for payment systems where payment is not
immediately moved between accounts of the transacting parties. May or may not be
present to the extent payment system leverages functionality of PSP.

### Idempotency

Idempotent operations is a primary concern when designing payment systems. It's
imperative to guarantee that a customer won't be charged more than once,
irrespective of external factors like network errors or service provider
downtime. Operations should be repeated/retried as necessary, producing the same
result without any effects on the system. This implies **exactly-once
delivery:** each payment must be executed _at least_ once, and can be executed
_at most_ once.

#### Retry Strategies

The at-least once guarantee can be met with **retries**. A retry strategy should
consider the length of time to wait before retrying, and when the request should
be canceled with no further attempts. See [[client-retry-strategies]] for
example strategies.

#### Idempotency Key

The at-most guarantee can bet met with **idempotency key usage**. For web/mobile client-server communication,
[UUID](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Universally_unique_identifier) is commonly
used in request headers as an idempotency key (`<idempotency-key: key_value>`);
this is recommended by Stripe and Paypal. Alternatively, e-commerce websites
commonly use the id of shopping carts right before checkout.

- Reliability / Fault Tolerance
- Handling Payment Failures
- Handling Payment Processing Delays

- Security
- Reconciliation
- Executing Payments (PSP Integration)


### Industry Examples:
- [Uber](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5TD8m7w1xE0)
- [Shopify](https://help.shopify.com/en/manual/payments/shopify-payments)
- [Stripe](https://stripe.com/docs/api)


[//begin]: # "Autogenerated link references for markdown compatibility"
[client-retry-strategies]: client-retry-strategies "Client Retry Strategies"
[//end]: # "Autogenerated link references"